SMART LOCAL MPLPB
=================


A Retrieval-Bounded Front End for a Local Web


Mitchell D. McPhetridge
Independent Researcher


------------------------------------------------------------------------------


  Field        Value
  -----------  ----------------------------------------------
  Document ID  MPLPB-SMART-011
  Category     Specification / Reference Implementation
  Updated      2026-08-12T00:00Z v1
  Status       current
  Scope        The front-end layer that queries an MPLPB
               local web, routes questions by declared scope,
               cites retrieved pages with provenance, and
               writes taught answers back as documents
  When to use  Building or deploying a front end over a local
               web; deciding what a retrieval layer is
               allowed to answer; reviewing the mode
               controller as implemented rather than as
               specified
  Supersedes   —


Related. MPLPB as a Local Web (MPLPB-LOCAL-008 v4) — the corpus this
front end reads. A Modular Mode-Switching Architecture for a Mythic-Logic
Companion (MPLPB-MODE-008) — the mode controller. Separate, Allowed to Chat,
and Overridden by Scope (MPLPB-SEP-007) — the precedence rule. B.A.S.I.C.
AI: A Walk Down Memory Lane with Code and Curiosity (2025) — the loop.

Back to. Main Index > Specification / Architecture Sub-Index


------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Abstract
--------


The MPLPB local-web specification describes a bounded knowledge corpus as an
actual website: plain HTML files in a directory, connected by relative links,
starting at index.html. It specifies the file layout, the page metadata, the
crawl algorithm, the three ingestion paths, and eight structural checks. What
it does not specify is what happens at the other end — what a program that
consults such a corpus is permitted to do with what it retrieves, and what it
must do when it retrieves nothing.

This paper describes Smart Local MPLPB, a reference front end that answers
that question in code. It is a standard-library Python package providing a
chat console, a browser view, and a library API over a local web. Its
defining property is negative: it cannot answer from anywhere except a page
the crawler found under the corpus root. Nothing matched produces not in this
corpus, never a plausible paragraph from elsewhere.

Four commitments follow from that one. Retrieval carries provenance that
cannot be separated from the text, so that a local page is never cited as a
published one. Routing respects declared scope, so that two spokes with
something to say about the same question produce a request to narrow rather
than a blended answer. Mode switching assigns authority in advance, so that a
safety-adjacent topic reaches the careful mode before any other trigger can
claim it. And teaching — the tell me and I will remember loop inherited from
a 1960s-language toy chatbot — writes a validating, superseding, cited
document rather than appending a line to a file.

The implementation is 52 tests, no dependencies, and no network. The ablation
that would establish whether any of this beats a flat directory of the same
files has not been run, and §14 states it alongside four other falsifiers.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------


1. The Gap This Fills
---------------------


MPLPB-LOCAL-008 defines a corpus and the discipline that keeps it honest. It
is careful about the things a corpus can be wrong about: a broken link, an
orphan page, a duplicate document ID, a retired page in the wrong place, a
timestamp that cannot be ordered. Its failure-mode index runs to eleven
entries, and the validator catches eight of them mechanically.

But three of those eleven failures are not defects in the corpus at all. They
are defects in whatever is reading it.

- FM-L7, retrieval without provenance. The search layer returns a fragment
  with no document identity attached. The fragment may be perfectly accurate
  and still be unusable, because nothing downstream can tell whether it is
  current.
- FM-L8, model bypass. The reader answers a corpus-specific question from
  its own prior knowledge instead of a retrieved page. The corpus was
  well-formed, crawlable, and irrelevant.
- FM-L10, local/public confusion. A local document is cited as though it
  were published, inventing an authority the corpus never claimed.

No amount of structural validation prevents any of these. A corpus can pass
all eight checks and be read by a program that ignores it. The specification
says this plainly and then, correctly, stops: the reader was out of scope.

Smart Local MPLPB is the reader, written to make those three failures
structurally difficult rather than merely discouraged.


2. What a Front End Is Allowed to Do
------------------------------------


The design rests on one asymmetry. A front end that occasionally says I don't
have that is mildly annoying. A front end that occasionally invents a
confident answer that reads exactly like a retrieved one is corrosive, because
the user cannot tell the two apart, and after a few undetected instances the
provenance on every other answer stops meaning anything.

The two failures are not symmetric, so the design is not balanced between
them. Every mode in the shipped configuration carries
answer_without_retrieval: false. There is no mode that improvises. When
retrieval returns nothing, the console says so, lists the spokes that do exist
with their declared scopes, and — if the running mode permits — offers to be
taught.

This is the whole argument for the package. Everything below is machinery in
service of it.


3. Four Layers
--------------


The local-web specification separates three layers: the corpus, the crawler
and index, and the reasoning that queries them. This implementation keeps that
separation and splits the third, because deciding where an answer comes from
and writing the answer are different jobs with different failure modes.

  Layer            Modules                             Owns
  ---------------  ----------------------------------  ----------------------------------------------
  1. Corpus        page.py, crawl.py, validate.py      What a page is, how to enumerate pages,
                                                       whether the corpus is well-formed
  2. Retrieval     index.py, cite.py                   Finding pages, and the provenance that travels
                                                       with them
  3. Decision      router.py, modes.py                 Which page should answer, and what the answer
                                                       is permitted to be
  4. Presentation  console.py, server.py, notebook.py  How it reaches a person, and how a person
                                                       writes back


The split matters because layer 3 produces a data structure, not prose. The
router returns a routing decision — kind, primary page, spokes touched,
declared owner, related pages, path back — and the console renders it. A
different renderer can sit on the same decision: a template, a person, or a
language model. In every case the provenance rules were already enforced one
layer down, where they cannot be talked out of.


4. Retrieval Discipline
-----------------------


Retrieval is a SQLite FTS5 index built in memory from crawl records, with a
LIKE-based ranker as a fallback when the host interpreter's sqlite3 was
compiled without FTS5. A corpus should not stop being searchable because of
how somebody's Python was built.

Three rules shape what comes back.

Narrow before broad. The first pass requires every content term. Only if
that returns nothing does a second pass accept any term. Requiring all terms
first is what stops a question dragging in a page that merely shares one
common word with it — which is precisely how routing ends up calling two
unrelated spokes a tie.

A shared ordinary word is not a match. The broad pass only earns a result
if the question contained a term that is distinctive in this corpus, defined
as appearing in at most half the pages. Without this guard, what does the
contract say about liability retrieves a page about document supersession,
because that page happens to contain the word "say". The result looks like
retrieval and is not, which is worse than no answer.

Current by default; retired on request. Default retrieval filters to
status = current, per §7.1. Retired pages remain reachable by explicit
status filter or by document ID, and every returned record surfaces its
status. This is what preserves the corpus's ability to answer what did this
document used to say — the capability FM-L11 exists to protect, and the one
that is invisible to every other check.


5. Provenance
-------------


Every hit carries eleven fields, of which six are provenance: document ID,
path, version, status, spoke, and substrate. They are attributes of the hit
object, not decorations added at render time, so there is no code path that
produces text without them.

substrate is always local. Every citation says so:

    [LOCAL-SPEC-001 · spec/link_discipline.html · v2 · local · current]


This is deliberately slightly awkward to read. FM-L10 is a quiet failure — a
local note cited as a published source reads better than the truth, which is
exactly the problem. The citation format makes the honest version the default
version and gives no shorter form that omits it.

Retired hits carry a visible flag and a line stating that their current
replacement, if any, is the one to act on. A retrieved retired page is a
correct answer to a provenance question and a wrong answer to an operational
one, and only the reader knows which was asked.


6. Routing and Precedence
-------------------------


The boot block specifies routing in four clauses: broad requests go to the
relevant Sub-Index, specific requests to the best operational page, uncertain
requests back to the Main Index with a request to narrow, and every answer
names one to three related pages and the path back. The router implements all
four and adds a fifth case the boot block does not name.

Separate, Allowed to Chat, and Overridden by Scope establishes that for any
question, the MPLPB whose declared scope owns that question overrides any
out-of-scope instance that also speaks to it. Authority is local to the
question and decided by declared scope, not by size, age, confidence, or link
count. That paper generalizes the priority-override pattern from
safety-versus-narrative to domain-versus-domain.

Made executable, this becomes a scoring problem. Each spoke accumulates
rank-decayed weight from its hits, plus a bonus when its own declared scope
names the query's terms — declared scope is weighted because declared scope is
what precedence is decided by. A spoke owns the question when it leads the
runner-up by 1.5×.

Below that margin, the router returns ambiguous. The console names the
spokes it touched, quotes each declared scope, and asks the user to narrow.
It does not answer. Two MPLPBs that always defer to whoever spoke last are not
separate; they are one blurred instance wearing two names, and an answer
silently assembled from both is the fast version of the same collapse.

Two smaller rules keep this from misfiring. Only a directory that declares a
scope in its Sub-Index can contend for ownership — the Main Index and _log/
hold pages but claim no domain, so the revision log never wins an argument
about physics. And a page is preferred over its Sub-Index when the question
names something the page's own when-to-use triggers declare, which is what
the trigger field is for.

The 1.5× margin is a chosen constant, not a derived one. It is the most
arbitrary number in the package and the first thing worth tuning against a
real corpus. §14.3 states the test.


7. The Mode Controller
----------------------


The mode architecture from MPLPB-MODE-008 arrives almost unchanged: four
modes, explicit override phrases, implicit topic triggers, and
hard_reality_mode at priority 100.

Resolution order is fixed: an explicit override phrase, then a hard-reality
trigger, then any other implicit trigger, then the mode already running. The
point of assigning priority in advance is that the system is never in the
position of guessing which behaviour to believe after a conflict has already
arisen. Hard reality is the mode that overrides, so it is the one decided
first, and it cannot be talked out of by a later phrase in the same line.
Walk me through this contract clause contains a teaching trigger and a
hard-reality trigger; it lands in hard reality.

Three departures from the paper are worth naming.

The default is strict_tool_mode, not mythic_gm_mode. The paper defaults
to the mythic mode; the MPLPB boot block defaults to strict tool. A corpus
front end follows the boot block. Configurable either way.

Every configuration key changes observable behaviour. The paper's engine
JSON carries module toggles this front end has no implementation for. A config
key that changes nothing is a claim the software does not honour, so those
keys are absent rather than present and inert.

Hard reality declines to write. teach_allowed: false. Legal,
medical-adjacent, contractual, and safety topics should not enter a corpus as
something a session typed in and a later session reads back as a document,
carrying a document ID and a timestamp that make it look considered. The mode
that exists to be careful is the mode that refuses to record. When it
triggers, the console names the trigger word, states that the corpus is not
professional advice, and drops every overlay.

One addition the paper did not need: triggers are classified as instructions
or as subjects. Walk me through and explain describe how to answer, and
are stripped from the retrieval query. Contract and dosage are what the
question is about, and are kept. Without the distinction, asking the console
to walk you through supersession retrieves every page containing the word
"walk".

The mythic mode is retained in full, with one constraint carried over from the
paper's own identity clause: the symbolic frame decorates the presentation of
a retrieved page, never its content, and never speaks as though the console
were an entity. It remains a tool, and says so.


8. Teaching: Memory That Becomes a Document
-------------------------------------------


Twelve lines of BASIC from 2025:

     60 INPUT Q$
     80 OPEN "data.txt" FOR INPUT AS #2
    120 IF INSTR(DATA$, Q$) THEN PRINT "I remember! "; ...
    190 IF ResponseFound = 0 THEN
    200 PRINT "I don't know the answer to that. What should I say next time?"
    220 OPEN "data.txt" FOR APPEND AS #1
    230 PRINT #1, Q$; ":"; A$


The loop is right and is kept without alteration: check what you know, and
when you don't know, ask, and remember. The claim that program made for itself
was modest and correct — memory and association are powerful, and even the
simplest system can appear smart if it remembers what you told it last time.

What could not survive the move to a local web was data.txt. An appended
line has no document ID, no scope, no timestamp, no status, and no way to be
superseded. The crawler cannot see it. It is the flat-file form of an orphan
page, and a corpus that accumulates them silently develops a second, invisible
body of knowledge with none of the discipline that governs the first.

So the taught answer becomes a page. notebook.teach() writes HTML with the
full required metadata, assigns the next LOCAL-NOTE-nnnn identifier, lists
it in the notebook Sub-Index, appends a line to the revision log, and links
the spoke from the Main Index if it is not already there. The result passes
all eight structural checks, is found by the graph crawl on the next pass, is
retrievable, and is citable with provenance. Its face states what it is: a
record of what someone said, not a verified claim.

Revision is supersession, never overwriting. notebook.revise() performs all
five steps together, because any one of them omitted leaves the corpus
disagreeing with itself: the old file moves to _log/superseded/, its status
flips to retired, it is removed from the Sub-Index, the replacement names it
in supersedes, and the change is logged. The retired page's relative links
are rewritten for its new depth, so it still resolves. It is never deleted.

The consequence is the one worth having. :history LOCAL-NOTE-0001 returns
both versions, each with its own timestamp and status. A conversational
correction — no, it's cone 06 to 04 depending on the clay body — leaves a
dated record of what was believed before and what replaced it. The BASIC
program overwrote nothing and remembered everything; this remembers
everything and can also say when it changed its mind.


9. Validation as a Runtime Facility
-----------------------------------


The eight checks are not only a build step. :validate runs them inside a
session, and the browser front end exposes them at /_report. This is a
consequence of the console being able to write: a front end that adds pages
should be able to prove, at any moment, that the pages it added did not break
anything.

Findings are structured objects — check number, path, message, and the FM-L
code where the specification assigns one — rather than printed strings, so a
caller can act on them. The CLI formats them at the edge. validate and
crawl exit 1 on any failure, so both drop into CI unchanged; the included
workflow validates the example corpus, crawls it, runs the tests on three
Python versions, and scaffolds a fresh corpus to confirm that a new one
validates before it contains anything.


10. Two Front Ends
------------------


The console is the primary interface: the loop, the modes, the teaching,
and four introspection commands that exist because a retrieval system that
cannot explain itself is difficult to trust. :where reports the page the
last answer came from in full, with its declared scope and the notice that it
is a local document. :why reports the routing decision with per-spoke
scores and the margin rule. :history walks a supersession chain. :status
any opens retrieval to retired pages.

The browser view exists because the corpus is already a website — opening
index.html in a browser works with no server at all. The server adds the one
thing a file:// browse cannot do: search across pages, with each result
carrying its identity, and a structural report. It is read-only and bound to
localhost. Teaching happens in the console, where a person is present to be
asked what they mean.


11. Failure Modes Addressed
---------------------------


  Code    Failure                       How it is made difficult
  ------  ----------------------------  ----------------------------------------------
  FM-L1   Broken relative link          Check 11.1, runnable in-session
  FM-L2   Orphan page                   Reported by the crawler, never ingested;
                                        taught pages are linked at creation so they
                                        cannot become orphans
  FM-L3   Scope omission                Check 11.3; cite.scope_note reports a page
                                        that declares no scope
  FM-L4   Crawl escape                  Check 11.6, on resolved paths, not on href
                                        strings
  FM-L6   Superseded-content collision  Check 11.5, all five retirement steps enforced
                                        together
  FM-L7   Retrieval without provenance  Provenance is a field of the hit, not a
                                        rendering choice
  FM-L8   Model bypass                  No mode answers without a retrieved page
  FM-L9   Metadata trust failure        One parser, shared by crawler and validator
  FM-L10  Local/public confusion        Every citation states local, with no shorter
                                        form
  FM-L11  Retired-history loss          Retired pages ingested by audit; :history
                                        makes the capability visible


FM-L5, dynamic-page dependency, is prevented by construction: the package uses
html.parser from the standard library and never executes JavaScript, so a
page that requires rendering to be read is simply a page whose text is empty.


12. What This Does Not Claim
----------------------------


The console retrieving a page does not make the page true. Retrieval is a
statement about where text came from, not about whether it is correct, and
none of the eight checks is a fact-checker.

A taught page is a record of what somebody typed. It carries a document ID and
a timestamp, which makes it look considered, and the page says on its face
that it is not.

The mode controller changes what the front end does. It does not change what a
language model sitting on top of the front end does. A model can read a
provenance-carrying citation and paraphrase it into an unsourced claim in the
next paragraph. This package can hand a model a retrieved page and can decline
to hand it anything else; it cannot police what the model then says.

The mplpb:protected flag filters retrieval. It is not access control. The
source paper's identity-gatekeeping module was left unimplemented for the same
reason the paper itself states: a conversational system cannot verify who it
is talking to, and implementing an inference-based gate in code would dress a
stated caveat up as a mechanism.

Structure has not been shown to beat storage. That is §14.


13. Deployment
--------------


    git clone https://github.com/<you>/smart-local-mplpb.git
    cd smart-local-mplpb
    
    python3 -m mplpb validate site       # eight checks
    python3 -m mplpb chat site           # the console
    python3 -m mplpb serve site          # browser view at :8000
    python3 -m mplpb new mycorpus --title "Kiln Notes" --owner "Your Name"


No install step is required to run any of it. pip install -e . adds an
mplpb command; nothing else changes. Python 3.9 or newer, standard library
only, no network access at any point.


14. Open Tests and Falsifiers
-----------------------------


Each of these would count against the design if it came back negative. None
has been run.

14.1 — The ablation. Same corpus, same question set, structure removed:
routing by declared scope and precedence versus flat full-text search over the
same files. If flat search performs as well on answer accuracy and on correct
refusals, the structure is decoration and the storage was doing the work.
This is the test §14 of MPLPB-LOCAL-008 already names, applied to the front
end rather than the corpus.

14.2 — Bypass rate. Give a language model this corpus through this front
end, and separately as a flat directory. Measure how often it answers a
corpus-specific question from its own weights rather than from a retrieved
page. The console cannot bypass; the model on top of it can, and that number
is the interesting one. If provenance-carrying retrieval does not lower it,
FM-L8 is not addressed by this design in the way §2 claims.

14.3 — The precedence margin. The 1.5× ownership threshold is chosen, not
derived. Sweep it against a corpus with genuinely adjacent spokes and measure
false ties against false confident answers. If no setting separates them, the
scoring model is wrong and precedence needs a different signal than
rank-decayed hit weight plus declared-scope overlap.

14.4 — Does teaching survive contact with use? Run a real corpus for a
month of ordinary sessions. Count taught pages that were later superseded,
that were never retrieved again, and that turned out to be wrong. If most
taught pages are never read a second time, the notebook is an elaborate way of
writing into a void, and the BASIC program's flat file was the right size for
the job after all.

14.5 — Mode switching against real language. The implicit trigger lists
are keyword sets, which is the crudest possible intent detection. Measure how
often hard reality fires when it should, and how often it fires when it should
not, against transcripts of ordinary questions. A mode that overrides
everything is only safe if it triggers accurately; a high false-negative rate
would mean the priority guarantee in §7 is nominal.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Appendix A — Command Reference
------------------------------


    python3 -m mplpb chat <root> [--mode M] [--owner NAME] [--no-color]
    python3 -m mplpb ask <root> "question" [--mode M]
    python3 -m mplpb search <root> "query" [--status current|any] [-n N]
    python3 -m mplpb id <root> DOC-ID [--history]
    python3 -m mplpb crawl <root> [-o records.jsonl]
    python3 -m mplpb validate <root>
    python3 -m mplpb serve <root> [--host H] [--port P]
    python3 -m mplpb teach <root> "question" "answer" [--owner NAME]
    python3 -m mplpb new <root> [--title T] [--owner NAME] [--spoke name:scope]


Console commands: :help, :mode, :modes, :spokes, :where, :why,
:id, :history, :teach, :revise, :status, :validate, :stats,
:reload, :quit.


Appendix B — Mode Profiles as Implemented
-----------------------------------------


                                    strict_tool  teaching  mythic_gm  hard_reality
  --------------------------------  -----------  --------  ---------  ------------
  Priority                          10           20        20         100
  Narrative frame                   no           no        yes        no
  Scaffolded answer                 no           yes       no         no
  Answers without a retrieved page  no           no        no         no
  Records taught pages              yes          yes       yes        no
  Trigger is instruction            yes          yes       yes        no
  Default retrieval status          current      current   current    current


Appendix C — Crawl Record
-------------------------


    {
      "document_id": "LOCAL-SPEC-001",
      "path": "spec/link_discipline.html",
      "title": "Link Discipline — MPLPB Local",
      "category": "Specification / Architecture",
      "scope": "Relative-link rules and the crawl boundary for the local web",
      "when_to_use": "Adding a page; moving a page; a link broke",
      "updated": "2026-08-05T18:40Z v2",
      "owner": "Mitchell D. McPhetridge",
      "status": "current",
      "supersedes": ["LOCAL-SPEC-OLD-001"],
      "protected": false,
      "spoke": "spec",
      "substrate": "local",
      "discovered_by": "graph",
      "links": [
        { "rel": "index", "target": "index.html" },
        { "rel": "up", "target": "spec/_index.html" }
      ],
      "text": "Extracted visible page text..."
    }


The HTML is authoritative. The crawl record is derived.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Smart Local MPLPB is released as MIT-licensed software with CC BY 4.0
documentation. The implementation described here is a reference, not a
product, and several of its claims carry tests its author records as not yet
run.

MDM
